Guide to install searx on an Uberspace (#930)
Uberspace/lab: source/guide_searx.rst

.. highlight:: console

.. author:: FM <git.fm@mmw9.de>

.. tag:: web
.. tag:: python

.. sidebar:: Logo

  .. image:: _static/images/searx.png
      :align: center

#####
searX
#####

.. tag_list::

Searx_ (Wikipedia_) is a free and open-source metasearch engine which aggregate results from more than 70 search services (e.g. Google, Bing etc.) and to avoid user tracking and profiling by these ones.

There are public instances_ of searx available, to get a personal practice before you install your own.

License
=======

Searx is released under the `GNU Affero General Public License`_.

----

.. note:: For this guide you should be familiar with the uberspace basic concepts of

  * supervisord_
  * domains_
  * `web backends`_

Installation
============

Step 1 - Repository Cloning
---------------------------

We will prepare the destination for the searx repository:

.. code-block:: console

 [isabell@stardust ~]$ mkdir -p ~/opt/searx/

And clone the repository from GitHub:

.. code-block:: console

 [isabell@stardust ~]$ git clone https://github.com/searx/searx.git ~/opt/searx/

Step 2 - Python Module Installation
-----------------------------------

----

> .. note:: Here we use python 3. This is the reason, that these guide consider this version aspect to the installation tool like ``pip`` and later to ``python`` it self.

Reviewer: I am not quite sure what the 2nd sentence means :sweat_smile: How about this?
```suggestion
.. note:: Here we use python 3, instead of the default python 2. For this reason, all ``pip`` and ``python`` commands need a version postfix ``3`` like below.
```

Author: Yes, you have right. I considered it in the guide update.

Some python modules are necessary and will be installed in your uberspace with ``pip3`` and the option ``--user``:

.. code-block:: console

>  [isabell@stardust ~]$ pip3 install --user requests pyyaml pygments werkzeug babel flask flask_babel lxml langdetect python-dateutil

Reviewer: This does not ensure the correct versions are installed. Luckily, searx comes with a [`requirements.txt` file](https://github.com/searx/searx/blob/master/requirements.txt) specifying the needed packages as well as their exact versions. Using that one instead of documenting the list here would make the guide more resilient to future updates and easier to use.

What do you think?
```suggestion
 [isabell@stardust ~]$ pip3 install --user ~/opt/searx/requirements.txt
 ```

Author: Yes, you have right. But it was necessary to consider additional options too.

Step 3 - Searx Configuration
----------------------------

We create the configuration file destination directory:

.. code-block:: console

 [isabell@stardust ~]$ mkdir ~/etc/searx

And copy the example file with basic default settings to the new directory:

.. code-block:: console

 [isabell@stardust ~]$ cp ~/opt/searx/utils/templates/etc/searx/use_default_settings.yml ~/etc/searx/settings.yml

Now it's time to change some entries in the configuration file:

1. Searx requires for the own instance a secret key. This random number will be created with openssl (16 digits) and placed direct in the config file via sed, the stream editor.

.. code-block:: console

>  [isabell@stardust ~]$ sed -i -e "s/ultrasecretkey/`openssl rand -hex 16`/g" ~/etc/searx/settings.yml

Reviewer: While `sed` calls make the guide easier to use right now, it's harder to understand what's going on. Especially because `ultrasecertkey` is not a configuration key, but just an example value, which can randomly change in the future. Please adapt this section to generate a token first and insert it into the file manually, like `ADMIN_TOKEN` in the [bitwarden_rs guide](https://lab.uberspace.de/guide_bitwarden.html#install-bitwarden-rs).

Author: Yes, you have right. I considered it in the guide update.

    default_lang : "" # Default search language - leave blank to detect from browser information or use codes from 'languages.py'

server:
    port : 8888
    bind_address : "0.0.0.0" # address to listen on
    secret_key : "01234567890123456" # change this!
    base_url : False # Set custom base_url. Possible values: False or "https://your.custom.host/location/"
    image_proxy : False # Proxying image results through searx

# uncomment below section if you have running morty proxy
#result_proxy:
#    url : http://127.0.0.1:3000/
#    key : !!binary "your_morty_proxy_key"

Step 4 - Supervisord Setup
--------------------------

At first we must create the service file ``~/etc/services.d/searx.ini`` and the following content:

.. warning:: The PATH variable consider the installed Python modules regarding to the version 3.6 at this time point. Please have a look in the directory ``~/.local/lib/`` to be sure which version is the actual ones.

.. code-block::
 :emphasize-lines: 2

[program:searx]
environment =

>  PATH="%(ENV_HOME)s/opt/searx/:%(ENV_HOME)s/.local/lib/python3.6/:%(ENV_PATH)s",

Reviewer: `PATH` specifies where to find binaries to run, but  `~/.local/lib/python3.6` and `~/opt/searx` both don't contain any binaries. Are you sure this is needed?

Author: I had in a Python project a problem with environment settings to find the external modules (libraries). But in this case everthing is fine without the PATH.

 SEARX_SETTINGS_PATH="%(ENV_HOME)s/etc/searx/settings.yml"
autostart=yes
autorestart=yes
command=python3 %(ENV_HOME)s/opt/searx/searx/webapp.py

> We must report to supervisord that there is a new ini file to consider:

Reviewer: Please use the [supervisord include](https://github.com/Uberspace/lab/blob/main/source/includes/supervisord.rst) here, like in the [bitwarden guide](https://lab.uberspace.de/guide_bitwarden.html#setup-daemon).

Author: Ok.

.. code-block:: console

 [isabell@stardust ~]$ supervisorctl reread
 searx: available

 And then to start the daemon:

 .. code-block:: console

 [isabell@stardust ~]$ supervisorctl update
 searx: added process group

At this time point, searx should be run in the background.

Step 5 - Domain Setup
---------------------

This guide consider a subdomain ``searx.isabell.example`` for your own searx instance.

.. code-block:: console

 [isabell@stardust ~]$ uberspace web domain add searx.isabell.example

.. note:: Please be sure, that your new subdomain is configured at your domain provider too.

If you want to find out that everthing is maintained for the web server on your Uberspace account, use the command:

.. code-block:: console

[isabell@stardust ~]$ uberspace web domain list
isabell.example
searx.isabell.example

> isabell.uber.space

Reviewer: The example domain in all guides is `isabell.uber.space`, except for guides that need multiple domains. Please remove this section and use `isabell.uber.space` everywhere else.

Author: @luto All comments by you are in a new version of my guide and here as attachment available:
[guide_searx.rst.txt](https://github.com/Uberspace/lab/files/5983661/guide_searx.rst.txt)

Reviewer: thanks! you upload the changes here so they show up in the pull request? https://github.com/maitrenageur/lab/edit/main/source/guide_searx.rst

Author: @luto I'm not so familiar with GitHub, but I updated my repository with the new version of the guide and a logo image.

Author: @luto Is somthing else to do from my side?

Step 6 - Web Backend Setup
--------------------------

> This step is important, that your running searx instance is reachable from outside.

Reviewer: Please use the [web backend include](https://github.com/Uberspace/lab/blob/main/source/includes/web-backend.rst) here, like in the [1up guide](https://lab.uberspace.de/guide_up1.html#configure-web-server).

Author: Ok.
